HIP: Introduction of Blocks (#415)
hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal: HIP/hip-415.md

# Introduction of Blocks

---
hip: 415 
title: Introduction of Blocks
author: Daniel Ivanov<daniel-k-ivanov95@gmail.tech>, Ivan Kavaldzhiev<ivan.kavaldzhiev@limechain.tech>
working-group: Danno Ferrin<@shemnon>, Richard Bair<@rbair23>, Steven Sheehy<steven.sheehy@hedera.com>, Mitchell 
Martin<mitch@swirlds.com>
type: Standards Track 
category: Core 
needs-council-approval: Yes 
status: Draft
created: 2022-04-03
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/434
updated: 2022-04-13
requires: HIP-435
---

## Abstract

Specifies how to introduce and formalize the concepts of Blocks in Hedera Hashgraph so that it can be used as a foundation on which further interoperability with existing DLT networks and infrastructure can be built.

## Motivation

> The concept of blocks is a vital part of the existing Ethereum infrastructure and, as such, the introduction of blocks 
> in Hedera can be considered a foundational step towards greater interoperability with EVM based tooling, explorers, exchanges and wallet providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The concept of blocks is a vital part of the existing Ethereum infrastructure and, as such, the introduction of  a
standard mapping between existing transaction ordering in Hedera and the notion of blocks can be considered a
foundational step towards greater interoperability with EVM based tooling, explorers, exchanges and wallet
providers.
```

## Rationale

> Hedera must have a single consistent answer to what a block number is, the hash and which transactions are included in that block number. This is required for two reasons:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hedera must have a single consistent answer to what transactions belong to a block and the identifying hash and number for that block.  This is required for two reasons:
```

**Design Goal #2 Lightweight**

The Block concept must not add a lot of complexity and performance overhead to the processing of transactions. It must have minimal impact on the TPS of the network.

Based on the described design goals above, the outlined specification defines that block properties are to be computed and populated at different points in time and by different components of the network, based on their responsibility.

## Specification

**Definitions**

- `block` → `Record file` containing all `Record Stream Objects` for a given time frame. Block times are to be 
  at least `hedera.recordStream.logPeriod` seconds. The genesis block and therefore number (`blockNumber=0`) is 
  considered the stream start date with the first RCD file exported from `services` nodes.
- `block number` → consecutive number of the `Record file` that is being incremented by `1` for every new `Record 
  file`. For already existing networks, this value will be initially bootstrapped through `Mirror Nodes` and after that 
  maintained by services nodes.

> - `block hash` → `32 byte` prefix (out of `48 bytes`) of the running hash of the last `Record Stream Object` from 

Reviewer 2: I confirmed in the mirror node database that the first 32 bytes of the hash are still unique across all rows.

Object` from the previous `Record File` and `timestamp` is `1st Record Stream Object`'s consensus `timestamp`.

With the introduction of the new version of `Record Stream Object`s, the respective libraries for state proofs must be updated:
- [https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-mirror-node/tree/main/hedera-mirror-rest/check-state-proof](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-mirror-node/tree/main/hedera-mirror-rest/check-state-proof)
- [https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-state-proof-verifier-go](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-state-proof-verifier-go)

### Mirror Nodes

Based on the updates specified above, the record stream objects will pass all the necessary information for Mirror Nodes to build `Record files`/`blocks` and store enough data about them to be able to answer all block related queries outlined above. 
To do this they will need to read and store the `number` specified in the `Record file`. For 
old record files, they will be derived through a migration process as specified below.

**Historical State / Migration**

`Record files` prior to the introduction of the block properties will not expose the required information. `mirror 

> nodes` that have full sync on `testnet` / `mainnet` networks will export a file containing mapping of record file 

Reviewer 2: nit: We're not exporting it but just maintaining a copy in the mirror node's classpath.

Author: updated

consensus end to block number in compressed CSV format:
```
...
1615410294009988000,5548088
1615410300360028000,5548089
```
The file would be generated by executing the SQL `select concat(consensus_end, ',', index) from record_file order by consensus_end asc`

> via psql from `mainnet` and `testnet` databases. It will be taken from mirror nodes that have a full history from stream

Reviewer 2: Would prefer database details be left out as the mirror node database is not a public API that we want to have to maintain in docs.

| hash | Services | Stored in services (last 256 blocks). It is the 32 byte prefix of the runningHash of the previous record file. That is the running hash of the last record stream object from the previous record file. It is exposed to the 1) EVM during Transaction Execution through the BLOCKHASH opcode; 2) In the record file as the End Object Running Hash |
| baseFeePerGas | Mirror Node | Always zero, since there is no EIP-1559 style floating block capacity fees in Hedera. |
  | difficulty | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to hex encoded 0 |
  | extraData | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Nodes(s) to 0x |
  | gasLimit | Mirror Node |  Computed by Mirror Node(s). The gas throttle limit per second multiplied by the target block time. |
  | gasUsed | Mirror Node | Computed by Mirror Node(s). The sum of the gasUsed value for all ContractCall and ContractCreate transactions within the block. |
  | logsBloom | Mirror Node | Computed by Mirror Node(s). It is the bloom filter for the logs within the block. |

>   | miner | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by the Mirror Nodes to the 0.0.98 address in the long zero prefix format.  |

Reviewer 2: Not sure we should populate this as in the future staking accounts 800/801 will also receive block rewards.

Reviewer: Miner implies two things, (a) who gets paid and (b) who decided what transactions went into that block.  Since hedera doesn't really have a single party picking transactions and ordering them for any timeframe an argument can be made there is no miner, so an all-zero address may be more correct and dodges the 0.0.98, 0.0.600, 0.0.601 question.

Author: Your argument is valid. I was focused on the (a) part and haven't thought about the (b) part. I am okay with setting it to `0.0.0`

  | mixHash | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to 0x |
  | nonce | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to hex-encoded 0 |
  | parentHash | Mirror Node | The hash of the previous block. |

>   | receiptsRoot | N/A | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to hex-encoded 0. It is expected that in the future it will be 
> populated once traceability is implemented. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  | receiptsRoot | N/A | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to hex-encoded 0. |
```
I don't expect we will ever populate it. This is core to ethereum's validation loop and since we don't validate in the same way we shouldn't imply it's any reasonable value.  This differes from uncles root, where there are never uncles so an empty list is correct.

  | sha3Uncles | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to the SHA3 computation of empty array (`0x1dcc4de8dec75d7aab85b567b6ccd41ad312451b948a7413f0a142fd40d49347`) |
  | size | Mirror Node | Computed by Mirror Node(s). The size of the record file. |

>   | stateRoot | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to hex-encoded 0. May contain state proof data in the future |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| stateRoot | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to hex-encoded 0. |
```
Lets not imply any future use. It may box us in if our state proof resolves to a single root too.

  | totalDifficulty | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Nodes(s) to hex-encoded 0 |
  | transactions | Mirror Node | Computed by Mirror Node(s) by ingesting the record stream and aggregating RecordStreamObjects of type ContractCall and ContractCreate within the block. |
  | transactionsRoot | Mirror Node | The same value as block `hash` |
  | uncles | Mirror Node | Hardcoded by Mirror Node(s) to empty array [] |

## Backwards Compatibility

The following breaking changes will be introduced with the implementation of the HIP:

- `BLOCKHASH` will no longer return an empty `hash` but the actual `hash` of the block as per the EVM specification.

> - `NUMBER` will no longer return the `timestamp` of the `block`, but rather the proper `block` number as specified in the HIP.

Reviewer: So this makes a commitment for us that we will never use the inter-block times for number, and that we will know when the block counter increments prior to the execution of the EVM.

Author: Yes, that is correct.
The block updates are occurring at the and of the `handleTransaction` thread post Transaction Execution, at the point where we export the TX Record for streaming. At that point, the check for the new block/record file is executed. If new block/file is to be created, the transaction is handled and exported will be included in the new block and will "close" the previous one. 

We must verify that the correct `timestamp`, `blockhash` and `number` are set and returned during the execution of the first transaction within the block. It might be the case that the execution is performed against the "old" values  (aka parent block data).

---
hip: 415
title: Introduction Of Blocks
author: Daniel Ivanov<daniel-k-ivanov95@gmail.tech>, Ivan Kavaldzhiev<ivan.kavaldzhiev@limechain.tech>
working-group: Danno Ferrin<@shemnon>, Richard Bair<@rbair23>, Steven Sheehy<steven.sheehy@hedera.com>, Mitchell Martin<mitch@swirlds.com>
type: Standards Track
category: Core
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Last Call
created: 2022-03-28
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/434

> last-call-date-time: 2022-05-03

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
last-call-date-time: 2022-05-03 07:00:00 +0000
```

> requires: HIP-435

Reviewer 3: When 435 gets into master, link to it here [HIP-435](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-435)

`lastConsensusTimestamp` to keep track of the last-seen consensus timestamp that was processed. In this way, we can
ensure that we have at least `1000ns`  difference between the last processed transaction before a new file is created.
The unit of time to be used for those 2 properties is `nanos`. In this way if we have a `parent transaction` with at
least one `child precompile transaction` they all will be included in the same `block`/`Record file`. Otherwise, we 
might have a corner case where a `parent transaction` is included in one block, and its `child precompile transaction` 
falls into the next block since it will increase the `consensus timestamp` with `1ns`. Therefore, the algorithm for 
checking whether to start a new file would be the following:

A new `Record Stream Object` enters `addObject(T object)` in `TimestampStreamFileWriter`. It has a consensus timestamp
`T`. We create a new file only if both (1) and (2) conditions are met:

1. `T - lastConsensusTime > 1000ns`
2. `T - firstConsensusTimeInCurrentFile > 2s`

or

if `lastConsensusTime` or `firstConsensusTimeInCurrentFile` is `null`

### Services

> Services is to update the processing logic of transactions so that it supports logic for determining new record file 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Services are to update the processing logic of transactions so that it supports logic for determining new record file 
```

> periods, increment `block` number and keep `block` relevant data. The proposed solution specifies a `long` field to be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
periods, incrementing `block` number and keeping `block` relevant data. The proposed solution specifies a `long` field to be
```

used for the block number counter, incremented every `hedera.recordStream.logPeriod` seconds. Using a signed 32-bit int
would result in the block number rolling over in 140 years (if current 2-second length is kept). Sub-second block 

> lengths would exhaust that number well within the operational lifetime of typical networks. A signed 64 bit integer

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
lengths would exhaust that number well within the operational lifetime of typical networks. A signed 64-bit integer
```

			if (`currentTS` - `lastConsensusTime` > `1000ns` && `currentTS` - `blockTimestamp` > `hedera.recordStream.logPeriod`) return `true`; else `false`
	}
	if (`newBlock`) {
			`blockHashes[blockNumber] = keccak256(runningHash)` // `runningHash` is stored in `RecordStreaming`. It is a running hash of the last processed RSO
			delete `blockHashes[blockNumber - 256]`
			`blockNumber++`
			`blockTimestamp = currentTS`
	}
	processTransaction(tx)
	...
}

Migration:
`blockNumber = bootstrapLastBlockNumber`, where `bootstrapLastBlockNumber` is a system property added on startup.
`blockTimestamp = bootstrapLastBlockTimestamp`, where `bootstrapLastBlockTimestamp` is a system property added on startup.
```

`number`, `timestamp` and `hash` (map of the 256 most recent blocks) must be available during transaction execution
since the following opcodes are to be supported as per the EVM specification:

- `BLOCKHASH` → Accepts the block `NUMBER` for which to return the `hash`. Valid range is the last `256` blocks (not including the current one)
- `NUMBER` → Returns the current block number
- `TIMESTAMP` → Returns the unix timestamp of the current block

**Record File**

> Once HIP-435 is implemented, record files are to be migrated to protobufs. New `long blockNumber` property is to be 

Author: I think that HIP-435 will be merged after this PR. Maybe we can update the link after we merge HIP-415 (post-factum)

---
hip: 415
title: Introduction Of Blocks

> author: Daniel Ivanov<daniel-k-ivanov95@gmail.tech>, Ivan Kavaldzhiev<ivan.kavaldzhiev@limechain.tech>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
author: Daniel Ivanov <daniel.k.ivanov95@gmail.tech>, Ivan Kavaldzhiev <ivan.kavaldzhiev@limechain.tech>
```

> working-group: Danno Ferrin<@shemnon>, Richard Bair<@rbair23>, Steven Sheehy<steven.sheehy@hedera.com>, Mitchell Martin<mitch@swirlds.com>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
working-group: Danno Ferrin <@shemnon>, Richard Bair <@rbair23>, Steven Sheehy <steven.sheehy@hedera.com>, Mitchell Martin <mitch@swirlds.com>
```

type: Standards Track
category: Core
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Last Call
created: 2022-03-28
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/434

> last-call-date-time: 2022-05-03 07:00:00 +0000

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
last-call-date-time: 2022-05-03T07:00:00Z
```

> requires: HIP-435

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
requires: 435
```

# Introduction of Blocks

---
hip: 415 
title: Introduction of Blocks
author: Daniel Ivanov<daniel-k-ivanov95@gmail.tech>, Ivan Kavaldzhiev<ivan.kavaldzhiev@limechain.tech>
working-group: Danno Ferrin<@shemnon>, Richard Bair<@rbair23>, Steven Sheehy<steven.sheehy@hedera.com>, Mitchell 
Martin<mitch@swirlds.com>
type: Standards Track 
category: Core 
needs-council-approval: Yes 

> status: Draft

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
status: Last Call
```
